[MUSIC]
Now we'll talk about MANETs,
Mobile Ad Hoc Networks and
how there used in Internet of Things to
connect Internet of Things objects to
bigger networks, to the Internet itself.
And a we'll talk a little bit about
how the code that we're gonna write.
That your gonna write in class, and
how it a, you won't directly have to know
the details of these thing because you'll
be writing generally high level code, but
still it's important for
you to be familiar with these concepts.
So a Mobile Ad Hoc Network, a MANET,
is a self-configuring network.
By self-configuring we mean that
the hosts in the know, in the network
configure themselves because
they're moving around all the time.
So their connections,
their connectivity can change across time.
So for instance in this picture,
you see a bunch of nodes,
you see cell phones,
some cell phones, a car, right.
Whatever the IoT device is
there are a set of them, and
then at the top middle
is this access point.
So this access point is the thing
that connects our MANET to
the main Internet, okay?
Now a MANET could be just independent and
not connected to the Internet at all, but
most commonly we're going to be connecting
to the Internet some way through
an access point.
Now the access point is typically,
usually not mobile.
It might be, it could be mobile,
but commonly it's not mobile,
and often wired, right?
And so it'll have wireless connections
to all the IoT devices, but
it might have a wired connection
to the main and Internet.
So, the access point
maybe isn't mobile but
everything else is, and
the way I've drawn the diagram up there.
I have lines between two
nodes if they can connect,
if they can communicate
directly to each another.
Meaning if they're in radio range and
they have communication, right?
So sometimes, for instance,
you look at the cell phone all the way on
the left versus the cell phone all the way
on the right, they don't have
an edge directly between them.
Because maybe they're out
of range of each other.
But they're both within range
of the same access point, so
they can communicate to each other
through that access point but
not directly in this
particular configuration.
So, the connections between these
components changes all the time,
because these things are moving, right?
So maybe, these two cell phones which
couldn't talk to each other before, not
directly anyway, the people who have the
cell phones, they walk near each other and
suddenly, there's a connection
directly between them.
But, maybe the car can no longer connect
to them because it just got out of range,
because it drove past.
So these networks, their connections
are coming and going overtime.
So that's what a Mobile Ad Hoc Network is.
Now, important aspects of MANET,
one is a power budget.
So you really have to worry about
power when you're talking about MANET,
because MANETs each one of the devices
mobile, these IoT devices, they're all
mobile They're all running off of
batteries and the batteries can run out.
So you have to generally change
the protocol to be more power
restrictive, right?
It has to save power somehow.
So that changes a lot of
the way you do networking.
So you send less data, for instance.
You're restricted to sending less data
because every piece of data you send
that's gonna be some kind of power that
you use to drive the antenna, right?
So the battery is really important
cuz the batteries are heavy, right?
I mean batteries are often
the heaviest component, or
usually the heaviest
component in these systems.
I mean I think about my quad copter.
The battery weighs as much as
the rest of the whole copter.
I mean it's so big, right?
And that thing lasts for
15 minutes of flight time.
It's ridiculous.
But you get the same thing with cell
phones and all this so where the battery
is if not as heavy and everything else,
at least it's the heaviest component in
the system, and the biggest
single component in the system.
So battery power is really important
when you're talking about MANET so
you change the protocol to save power.
In addition,
you typically have lower data rate
because you're using less power
you have to send data more slowly.
So, you have less of a data,
lower data rate.
An example, sort of a ball park example,
is take Bluetooth.
So, you're familiar with Bluetooth right?
Bluetooth and
compare that to Bluetooth low energy.
So, Bluetooth is a network protocol,
wireless.
Bluetooth low energy is another, is also
a network protocol derived from Bluetooth
but is a low energy version of Bluetooth.
So Bluetooth,
you can send video across Bluetooth.
You can get enough data rate sent to
transmit video reasonably well, okay?
Now Bluetooth low energy,
there's no way you get the same data rate.
It uses a lot less power but
you get a lot lower data rate.
So you can't send video.
So the fact that you're going to low
power restricts you in terms of your data
rate and that restricts your
functionality in a lot of different ways.
Security, often security costs
you in terms of power, right?
So say you wanna do encryption, right?
You wanna take all your messages and
encrypt them before sending or
something like that takes power, right?
It takes power to do those operations,
to encrypt the date, decrypt the data.
So security, has a cost in terms of
power and since your power constraint
maybe you can't do as much
security as you wanted to do.
Also things like anti virus tools, right?
You never see anti virus tools for
cellphones or I think such a thing
exists but it's not common, right?
But if you talk about an IoT device,
like a watch or something.
They don't have antivirus for that because
the computational power just isn't there.
It doesn't have the extra cycles
to be able to do antivirus tasks
at the same time as
doing its regular tasks.
The reason for
that is because these IoT devices,
and we talked about this before, they're
designed to be much more efficient.
Meaning a desktop laptop 99.9% of
the time, it is being underutilized.
Very rarely are you fully
utilizing that processor.
So, it has extra cycles, extra power,
to be spent doing antivirus tasks or
something like that.
Embedded systems,
which IoT devices are they don't
have those excess cycles, right?
They use all the power they have, right?
Or most of it.
So they don't have extra cycles
to just be doing anti-virus,
without hurting the regular
function of the system.
So security often suffers in an IoT
device, because you don't have the power
budget to do it, and
maybe also you might not have the cost,
you might not have the money to pay for
the extra hardware that you would need.
Now in practice [COUGH] when we do network
programming later in specialization.
There are levels in the stack, right?
There are different layers in the stack,
Application, TCP/UDP and all this.
But we don't have to touch
those directly in our coding.
So, when we use an Arduino or
a Raspberry Pi you will be calling library
functions at the application layer.
So, your code is gonna be
at the application layer,
almost exclusively at
the application layer.
So, you call very simple functions which
will take care of the details for you.
So, for instance, as an example, you
might have a function called send message
an application layer function that
sends an message to an IP address.
Maybe you get, actually typically you'd
get an IP address and a port number,
which we'll talk about later,
you call, send a message, and
it'll send that message to that
IP address and that port number.
And all the details of TCP/UDP,
IP and data link.
That's all handled by the protocol stack,
all you do is call the library function.
Same thing on the receive, maybe there's a
ReceiveMessage that does a similar thing.
So you're making these calls at the
application layer of the simple library
function, and the details are being
handled by the library code itself, so
you don't have to worry about that.
Thank you.
[MUSIC]